<p>MARKET</p>
<h2>Chapter I</h2>
<p>FIFTH AVENUE is a canyon; its towering buildings dwarf the importance of the people hurrying through its narrow confines. But Fourteenth Street is a river, impersonally flowing, broad-bosomed, with strange and devious craft covering its expanse. To Angela the famous avenue seemed but one manifestation of living, but Fourteenth Street was the rendezvous of life itself. Here for those first few weeks after her arrival in New York she wandered, almost prowled, intent upon the jostling shops, the hurrying, pushing people, above all intent upon the faces of those people with their showings of grief, pride, gaiety, greed, joy, ambition, content. There was little enough of this last. These men and women were living at a sharper pitch of intensity than those she had observed in Philadelphia. The few coloured people whom she saw were different too; they possessed an independence of carriage, a purposefulness, an assurance in their manner that pleased her. But she could not see that any of these people, black or white, were any happier than those whom she had observed all her life.</p>
<p>But she was happier; she was living on the crest of a wave of excitement and satisfaction which would never wane, never break, never be spent. She was seeing the world, she was</p>
<p>getting acquainted with life in her own way without restrictions or restraint; she was young, she was temporarily independent, she was intelligent, she was white. She remembered an expression “free, white and twenty-one”,—this was what it meant then, this sense of owning the world, this realization that other things being equal, all things were possible. “If I were a man,” she said, “I could be president”, and laughed at herself for the “if” itself proclaimed a limitation. But that inconsistency bothered her little; she did not want to be a man. Power, greatness, authority, these were fitting and proper for men; but there were sweeter, more beautiful gifts for women, and power of a certain kind too. Such a power she would like to exert in this glittering new world, so full of mysteries and promise. If she could afford it she would have a salon, a drawing-room where men and women, not necessarily great, but real, alive, free, and untrammelled in manner and thought, should come and pour themselves out to her sympathy and magnetism. To accomplish this she must have money and influence; indeed since she was so young she would need even protection; perhaps it would be better to marry … a white man. The thought came to her suddenly out of the void; she had never thought of this possibility before. If she were to do this, do it suitably, then all that richness, all that fullness of life which she so ardently craved would be doubly hers. She knew that men had a better time of it than women, coloured men than coloured women, white men than white women. Not that she envied them. Only it would be fun, great fun to capture power and protection in addition to the freedom and independence which she had so long coveted and which now lay in her hand.</p>
<p>But, she smiled to herself, she had no way of approaching these ends. She knew no one in New York; she could conceive of no manner in which she was likely to form desirable acquaintances; at present her home consisted of the four walls of the smallest room in Union Square Hotel. She had gone there the second day after her arrival, having spent an expensive twenty-four hours at the Astor. Later she came to realize that there were infinitely cheaper habitations to be had, but she could not tear herself away from Fourteenth Street. It was Spring, and the Square was full of rusty specimens of mankind who sat on the benches, as did Angela herself, for hours at a stretch, as though they thought the invigorating air and the mellow sun would work some magical burgeoning on their garments such as was worked on the trees. But though these latter changed, the garments changed not nor did their owners. They remained the same, drooping, discouraged down and outers. “I am seeing life,” thought Angela, “this is the way people live,” and never realized that some of these people looking curiously, speculatively at her wondered what had been her portion to bring her thus early to this unsavoury company.</p>
<p>“A great picture!” she thought. “I’ll make a great picture of these people some day and call them ‘Fourteenth Street types’.” And suddenly a vast sadness invaded her; she wondered if there were people more alive, more sentient to the joy, the adventure of living, even than she, to whom she would also be a “type”. But she could not believe this. She was at once almost irreconcilably too concentrated and too objective. Her living during these days was so intense, so almost solidified, as though her desire to live as she did and she herself were so one and the same thing that it would have been practically impossible for another onlooker like herself to insert the point of his discrimination into her firm panoply of satisfaction. So she continued to browse along her chosen thoroughfare, stopping most often in the Square or before a piano store on the same street. There was in this shop a player-piano which was usually in action, and as the front glass had been removed the increased clearness of the strains brought a steady, patient, apparently insatiable group of listeners to a standstill. They were mostly men, and as they were far less given, Angela observed, to concealing their feelings than women, it was easy to follow their emotional gamut. Jazz made them smile but with a certain wistfulness—if only they had time for dancing now, just now when the mood was on them! The young woman looking at the gathering of shabby pedestrians, worn business men and ruminative errand boys felt for them a pity not untinged with satisfaction. She had taken what she wanted while the mood was on her. Love songs, particularly those of the sorrowful ballad variety brought to these unmindful faces a strained regret. But there was one expression which Angela could only half interpret. It drifted on to those listening countenances usually at the playing of old Irish and Scottish tunes. She noticed then an acuter attitude of attention, the eyes took on a look of inwardness of utter remoteness. A passer-by engrossed in thought caught a strain and at once his gait and expression fell under the spell. The listeners might be as varied as fifteen people may be, yet for the moment they would be caught in a common, almost cosmic nostalgia. If the next piece were jazz, that particular crowd would disperse, its members going on their meditative ways, blessed or cursed with heaven knew what memories which must not be disturbed by the strident jangling of the latest popular song.</p>
<p>“Homesick,” Angela used to say to herself. And she would feel so, too, though she hardly knew for what,—certainly not for Philadelphia and that other life which now seemed so removed as to have been impossible. And she made notes in her sketch book to enable her some day to make a great picture of these “types” too.</p>
<p>Of course she was being unconscionably idle; but as her days were filled to overflowing with the impact of new impressions, this signified nothing. She could not guess what life would bring her. For the moment it seemed to her both wise and amusing to sit with idle hands and see what would happen. By a not inexplicable turn of mind she took to going very frequently to the cinema where most things did happen. She found herself studying the screen with a strained and ardent intensity, losing the slight patronizing scepticism which had once been hers with regard to the adventures of these shadowy heroes and heroines; so utterly unforeseen a turn had her own experiences taken. This time last year she had never dreamed of, had hardly dared to long for a life as free and as full as hers was now and was promising to be. Yet here she was on the threshhold of a career totally different from anything that a scenario writer could envisage. Oh yes, she knew that hundreds, indeed thousands of white coloured people “went over to the other side”, but that was just the point, she knew the fact without knowing hitherto any of the possibilities of the adventure. Already Philadelphia and her trials were receding into the distance. Would these people, she wondered, glancing about her in the soft gloom of the beautiful theatre, begrudge her, if they knew, her cherished freedom and sense of unrestraint? If she were to say to this next woman for instance, “I’m coloured,” would she show the occasional dog-in-the-manger attitude of certain white Americans and refuse to sit by her or make a complaint to the usher? But she had no intention of making such an announcement. So she spent many happy, irresponsible, amused hours in the marvellous houses on Broadway or in the dark commonplaceness of her beloved Fourteenth Street. There was a theatre, too, on Seventh Avenue just at the edge of the Village, which she came to frequent, not so much for the sake of the plays, which were the same as elsewhere, as for the sake of the audience, a curiously intimate sort of audience made of numerous still more intimate groups. Their members seemed both purposeful and leisurely. When she came here her loneliness palled on her, however. All unaware her face took on the wistfulness of the men gazing in the music store. She wished she knew some of these pleasant people.</p>
<p>It came to her that she was neglecting her Art. “And it was for that that I broke away from everything and came to New York. I must hunt up some classes.” This she felt was not quite true, then the real cause rushed up to the surface of her mind: “And perhaps I’ll meet some people.”</p>
<p>She enrolled in one of the art classes in Cooper Union. This, after all, she felt would be the real beginning of her adventure. For here she must make acquaintances and one of them, perhaps several, must produce some effect on her life, perhaps alter its whole tenor. And for the first time she would be seen, would be met against her new background or rather, against no background. No boyish stowaway on a ship had a greater exuberance in going forth to meet the unknown than had Angela as she entered her class that first afternoon. In the room were five people, working steadily and chatting in an extremely desultory way. The instructor, one of the five, motioned her to a seat whose position made her one of the group. He set up her easel and as she arranged her material she glanced shyly but keenly about her. For the first time she realized how lonely she had been. She thought with a joy which surprised herself: “Within a week I’ll be chatting with them too; perhaps going to lunch or to tea with one of them.” She arranged herself for a better view. The young woman nearest her, the possessor of a great mop of tawny hair and smiling clear, slate-grey eyes glanced up at her and nodded, “Am I in your way?” Except for her hair and eyes she was nondescript. A little beyond sat a coloured girl of medium height and build, very dark, very clean, very reserved. Angela, studying her with inner secret knowledge, could feel her constantly withdrawn from her companions. Her refinement was conspicuous but her reserve more so; when asked she passed and received erasers and other articles but she herself did no borrowing nor did she initiate any conversation. Her squarish head capped with a mass of unnaturally straight and unnaturally burnished hair possessed a kind of ugly beauty. Angela could not tell whether her features were good but blurred and blunted by the soft night of her skin or really ugly with an ugliness lost and plunged in that skin’s deep concealment. Two students were still slightly behind her. She wondered how she could best contrive to see them.</p>
<p>Someone said: “Hi, there! Miss New One, have you got a decent eraser? all mine are on the blink.” Not so sure whether or not the term applied to herself she turned to meet the singularly intent gaze of a slender girl with blue eyes, light chestnut hair and cheeks fairly blazing with some unguessed excitement. Angela smiled and offered her eraser.</p>
<p>“It ought to be decent, it’s new.”</p>
<p>“Yes, it’s a very good one; many thanks. I’ll try not to trouble you again. My name’s Paulette Lister, what’s yours?”</p>
<p>“Angèle Mory.” She had changed it thus slightly when she came to New York. Some troubling sense of loyalty to her father and mother had made it impossible for her to do away with it altogether.</p>
<p>“Mory,” said a young man who had been working just beyond Paulette; “that’s Spanish. Are you by any chance?”</p>
<p>“I don’t think so.”</p>
<p>“He is,” said Paulette. “His name is Anthony Cruz—isn’t that a lovely name? But he changed it to Cross because no American would ever pronounce the Z right, and he didn’t want to be taken for a widow’s cruse.”</p>
<p>“That’s a shameful joke,” said Cross, “but since I</p>
<p>made it up, I think you might give me a chance to spring it, Miss Lister. A poor thing but mine own. You might have a heart.”</p>
<p>“Get even with her, why don’t you, by introducing her as Miss Blister?” asked Angela, highly diverted by the foolish talk.</p>
<p>Several people came in then, and she discovered that she had been half an hour too early, the class was just beginning. She glanced about at the newcomers, a beautiful Jewess with a pearly skin and a head positively foaming with curls, a tall Scandinavian, an obvious German, several more Americans. Not one of them made the photograph on her mind equal to those made by the coloured girl whose name, she learned, was Rachel Powell, the slate-eyed Martha Burden, Paulette Lister and Anthony Cross. Her prediction came true. With in a week she was on jestingly intimate terms with every one of them except Miss Powell, who lent her belongings, borrowed nothing, and spoke only when she was spoken to. At the end of ten days Miss Burden asked Angela to come and have lunch “at the same place where I go”.</p>
<p>On an exquisite afternoon she went to Harlem. At One Hundred and Thirty-fifth Street she left the ’bus and walked through from Seventh Avenue to Lenox, then up to One Hundred and Forty-seventh Street and back down Seventh Avenue to One Hundred and Thirty-ninth Street, through this to Eighth Avenue and then weaving back and forth between the two Avenues through Thirty-eighth, Thirty-seventh down to One Hundred and Thirty-fifth Street to Eighth Avenue where she took the Elevated and went back to the New York which she knew.</p>
<p>But she was amazed and impressed at this bustling, frolicking, busy, laughing great city within a greater one. She had never seen coloured life so thick, so varied, so complete. Moreover, just as this city reproduced in microcosm all the important features of any metropolis, so undoubtedly life up here was just the same, she thought dimly, as life anywhere else. Not all these people, she realized, glancing keenly at the throngs of black and brown, yellow and white faces about her were servants or underlings or end men. She saw a beautiful woman all brown and red dressed as exquisitely as anyone she had seen on Fifth Avenue. A man’s sharp, high-bred face etched itself on her memory,—the face of a professional man perhaps,—it might be an artist. She doubted that; he might of course be a musician, but it was unlikely that he would be her kind of an artist, for how could he exist? Ah, there lay the great difference. In all material, even in all practical things these two worlds were alike, but in the production, the fostering of those ultimate manifestations, this world was lacking, for its people were without the means or the leisure to support them and enjoy. And these were the manifestations which she craved, together with the freedom to enjoy them. No, she was not sorry that she had chosen as she had, even though she could now realize that life viewed from the angle of Opal and Jefferson Streets in Philadelphia and that same life viewed from One Hundred and Thirty-fifth Street and Seventh Avenue in New York might present bewilderingly different facets.</p>
<p>Unquestionably there was something very fascinating, even terrible, about this stream of life,—it seemed to her to run thicker, more turgidly than that safe, sublimated existence in which her new friends had their being. It was deeper, more mightily moving even than the torrent of Fourteenth Street. Undoubtedly just as these people,—for she already saw them objectively, doubly so, once with her natural remoteness and once with the remoteness of her new estate,—just as these people could suffer more than others, just so they could enjoy themselves more. She watched the moiling groups on Lenox Avenue; the amazingly well-dressed and good-looking throngs of young men on Seventh Avenue at One Hundred and Thirty-seventh and Thirty-fifth Streets. They were gossiping, laughing, dickering, chaffing, combining the customs of the small town with the astonishing cosmopolitanism of their clothes and manners. Nowhere down town did she see life like this. Oh, all this was fuller, richer, not finer but richer with the difference in quality that there is between velvet and silk. Harlem was a great city, but after all it was a city within a city, and she was glad, as she strained for last glimpses out of the lurching “L” train, that she had cast in her lot with the dwellers outside its dark and serried tents.</p>
<h2>Chapter II</h2>
<p>WHERE do you live?” asked Paulette, “when you’re not here at school?”</p>
<p>Angela blushed as she told her.</p>
<p>“In a hotel? In Union Square? Child, are you a millionaire? Where did you come from? Don’t you care anything about the delights of home? Mr. Cross, come closer. Here is this poor child living benightedly in a hotel when she might have two rooms at least in the Village for almost the same price.”</p>
<p>Mr. Cross came closer but without saying anything. He was really, Angela thought, a very serious, almost sad young man. He had never continued long the bantering line with which he had first made her acquaintance.</p>
<p>She explained that she had not known where to go. “Often I’ve thought of moving, and of course I’m spending too much money for what I get out of it,—I’ve the littlest room.”</p>
<p>Paulette opened her eyes very wide which gave an onlooker the effect of seeing suddenly the blue sky very close at hand. Her cheeks took on a flaming tint. She was really a beautiful, even fascinating girl—or woman,—Angela never learned which, for she never knew her age. But her fascination did not rest on her looks, or at least it did not arise from that source; it was more the result of her manner. She was so alive, so intense, so interested, if she were interested, that all her nerves, her emotions even were enlisted to accomplish the end which she might have in view. And withal she possessed the simplicity of a child. There was an unsuspected strength about her also that was oddly at variance with the rather striking fragility of her appearance, the trustingness of her gaze, the limpid unaffectedness of her manner. Mr. Cross, Angela thought negligently, must be in love with her; he was usually at her side when they sketched. But later she came to see that there was nothing at all between these two except a certain friendly appreciation tempered by a wary kindness on the part of Mr. Cross and a negligent generosity on the part of Paulette.</p>
<p>She displayed no negligence of generosity in her desire and eagerness to find Angela a suitable apartment. She did hold out, however, with amazing frankness for one “not too near me but also not too far away”. But this pleased the girl, for she had been afraid that Paulette would insist on offering to share her own apartment and she would not have known how to refuse. She had the complete egoist’s desire for solitude.</p>
<p>Paulette lived on Bank Street; she found for her new friend “a duck,—just a duck,—no other word will describe it,—of an apartment” on Jayne Street, two rooms, bath and kitchenette. There was also a tiny balcony giving on a mews. It was more than Angela should have afforded, but the ease with which her affairs were working out gave her an assurance, almost an arrogance of confidence. Besides she planned to save by getting her own meals. The place was already furnished, its former occupant was preparing to go to London for two or more years.</p>
<p>“Two years,” Angela said gaily, “everything in the world can happen to me in that time. Oh I wonder what will have happened; what I will be like!” And she prepared to move in her slender store of possessions. Anthony, prompted, she suspected by Paulette, offered rather shyly to help her. It was a rainy day, there were several boxes after all, and taxis were scarce, though finally he captured one for her and came riding back in triumph with the driver. Afterwards a few books had to be arranged, pictures must be hung. She had an inspiration.</p>
<p>“You tend to all this and I’ll get you the best dinner you ever tasted in your life.” Memories of Monday night dinners on Opal Street flooded her memory. She served homely, filling dishes, “fit for a drayman,” she teased him. There were corn-beef hash, roasted sweet potatoes, corn pudding, and, regardless of the hour, muffins. After supper she refused to let him help her with the dishes but had him rest in the big chair in the living-room while she laughed and talked with him from the kitchenette at a distance of two yards. Gradually, as he sat there smoking, the sadness and strain faded out of his thin, dark face, he laughed and jested like any ot</p>
<p>her normal young man. When he bade her good-bye he let his slow dark gaze rest in hers for a long silent moment. She closed the door and stood laughing, arranging her hair before the mirror.</p>
<p>“Of course he’s loads better looking, but something about him makes me think of Matthew Henson. But nothing doing, young-fellow-me-lad. Spanish and I suppose terribly proud. I wonder what he’d say if he really knew?”</p>
<p>She was to go to Paulette’s to dinner. “Just we two,” stipulated Miss Lister. “Of course, I could have a gang of men, but I think it will be fun for us to get acquainted.” Angela was pleased; she was very fond of Paulette, she liked for her generous, capable self. And she was not quite ready for meeting men. She must know something more about these people with whom she was spending her life. Anthony Cross had been affable enough, but she was not sure that he, with his curious sadness, his half-proud, half-sensitive tendency to withdrawal, were a fair enough type. However, in spite of Paulette’s protestations, there were three young men standing in her large, dark living-room when Angela arrived.</p>
<p>“But you’ve got to go at once,” said Paulette, laughing but firm; “here is my friend,—isn’t she beautiful? We’ve too many things to discuss without being bothered by you.”</p>
<p>“Paulette has these fits of cruelty,” said one of the three, a short, stocky fellow with an ugly, sensitive face. “She’d have made a good Nero. But anyway I’m glad I stayed long enough to see you. Don’t let her hide you from us altogether.” Another man made a civil remark; the third one standing back in the gloomy room said nothing, but the girl caught the impression of tallness and blondness and of a pair of blue eyes which stared at her intently. She felt awkward and showed it.</p>
<p>“See, you’ve made her shy,” said Paulette accusingly. “I won’t bother introducing them, Angèle, you’ll meet them all too soon.” Laughing, protesting, the men filed out, and their unwilling hostess closed the door on them with sincere lack of regret. “Men,” she mused candidly. “Of course we can’t get along without them any more than they can without us, but I get tired of them,—they’re nearly all animals. I’d rather have a good woman friend any day.” She sighed with genuine sincerity. “Yet my place is always full of men. Would you rather have your chops rare or well done? I like mine cooked to a cinder.” Angela preferred hers well done. “Stay here and look around; see if I have anything to amuse you.” Catching up an apron she vanished into some smaller and darker retreat which she called her kitchen.</p>
<p>The apartment consisted of the whole floor of a house on Bank Street, dark and constantly within the sound of the opening front door and the noises of the street. “But you don’t have the damned stairs when you come in late at night,” Paulette explained. The front room was, Angela supposed, the bedroom, though the only reason for this supposition was the appearance of a dressing-table and a wide, flat divan about one foot and a half from the floor, covered with black or purple velvet. The dressing table was a good piece of mahogany, but the chairs were indifferently of the kitchen variety and of the sort which, magazines affirm, may be made out of a large packing box. In the living room, where the little table was set, the same anomaly prevailed; the china was fine, even dainty, but the glasses were thick and the plating had begun to wear off the silver ware. On the other hand the pictures were unusual, none of the stereotyped things; instead Angela remarked a good copy of Breughel’s “Peasant Wedding”, the head of Bernini and two etchings whose authors she did not know. The bookcase held two paper bound volumes of the poems of Béranger and Villon and a little black worn copy of Heine. But the other books were high-brow to the point of austerity: Ely, Shaw and Strindberg.</p>
<p>“Perhaps you’d like to wash your hands?” called Paulette. “There’s a bathroom down the corridor there, you can’t miss it. You may have some of my favourite lotion if you want it—up there on the shelf.” Angela washed her hands and looked up for the lotion. Her eyes opened wide in amazement. Beside the bottle stood a man’s shaving mug and brush and a case of razors.</p>
<p>The meal, “for you can’t call it a dinner,” the cook remarked candidly, was a success. The chops were tender though smoky; there were spinach, potatoes, tomato and lettuce salad, rolls, coffee and cheese. Its rugged quality surprised Angela not a little; it was more a meal for a working man than for a woman, above all, a woman of the faery quality of Paulette. “I get so tired,” she said, lifting a huge mouthful, “if I don’t eat heartily; besides it ruins my temper to go hungry.” Her whole attitude toward the meal was so masculine and her appearance so daintily feminine that Angela burst out laughing, explaining with much amusement the cause of her merriment. “I hope you don’t mind,” she ended, “for of course you are conspicuously feminine. There’s nothing of the man about you.”</p>
<p>To her surprise Paulette resented this last statement. “There is a great deal of the man about me. I’ve learned that a woman is a fool who lets her femininity stand in the way of what she wants. I’ve made a philosophy of it. I see what I want; I use my wiles as a woman to get it, and I employ the qualities of men, tenacity and ruthlessness, to keep it. And when I’m through with it, I throw it away just as they do. Consequently I have no regrets and no encumbrances.”</p>
<p>A packet of cigarettes lay open on the table and she motioned to her friend to have one. Angela refused, and sat watching her inhale in deep respirations; she had never seen a woman more completely at ease, more assuredly mistress of herself and of her fate. When they had begun eating Paulette had poured out two cocktails, tossing hers off immediately and finishing Angela’s, too, when the latter, finding it too much like machine oil for her taste, had set it down scarcely diminished. “You’ll get used to them if you go about with these men. You’ll be drinking along with the rest of us.”</p>
<p>She had practically no curiosity and on the other hand no reticences. And she had met with every conceivable experience, had visited France, Germany and Sweden; she was now contemplating a trip to Italy and might go to Russia; she would go now, in fact, if it were not that a friend of hers, Jack Hudson, was about to go there, too, and as she was on the verge of having an affair with him she thought she’d better wait. She didn’t relish the prospect of such an event in a foreign land, it put you too much at the man’s mercy. An affair, if you were going to have one, was much better conducted on your own pied à terre.</p>
<p>“An affair?” gasped Angela.</p>
<p>“Yes,—why, haven’t you ever had a lover?”</p>
<p>“A lover?”</p>
<p>“Goodness me, are you a poll parrot? Why yes, a lover. I’ve had”—she hesitated before the other’s complete amazement,—“I’ve had more than one, I can tell you.”</p>
<p>“And you’ve no intention of marrying?”</p>
<p>“Oh I don’t say that; but what’s the use of tying yourself up now while you’re young? And then, too, this way you don’t always have them around your feet; you can always leave them or they’ll leave you. But it’s better for you to leave them first. It insures your pride.” With her babyish face and her sweet, high voice she was like a child babbling precociously. Yet she seemed bathed in intensity. But later she began to talk of her books and of her pictures, of her work and on all these subjects she spoke with the same subdued excitement; her eyes flashed, her cheeks grew scarlet, all experience meant life to her in various manifestations. She had been on a newspaper, one of the New York dailies; she had done press-agenting. At present she was illustrating for a fashion magazine. There was no end to her versatilities.</p>
<p>Angela said she must go.</p>
<p>“But you’ll come again soon, won’t you, Angèle?”</p>
<p>A wistfulness crept into her voice. “I do so want a woman friend. When a woman really is your friend she’s so dependable and she’s not expecting anything in return.” She saw her guest to the door. “We could have some wonderful times. Goodnight, Angèle.” Like a child she lifted her face to be kissed.</p>
<p>Angela’s first thought as she walked down the dark street was for the unfamiliar name by which Paulette had called her. For though she had signed herself very often as Angèle, no one as yet used it. Her old familiar formula came to her: “I wonder what she would think if she knew.” But of one thing she was sure: if Paulette had been in her place she would have acted in exactly the same way. “She would have seen what she wanted and would have taken it,” she murmured and fell to thinking of the various confidences which Paulette had bestowed upon her,—though so frank and unreserved were her remarks that “confidences” was hardly the name to apply to them. Certainly, Angela thought, she was in a new world and with new people. Beyond question some of the coloured people of her acquaintance must have lived in a manner which would not bear inspection, but she could not think of one who would thus have discussed it calmly with either friend or stranger. Wondering what it would be like to conduct oneself absolutely according to one’s own laws, she turned into the dark little vestibule on Jayne Street. As usual the Jewish girl who lived above her was standing blurred in the thick blackness of the hall, and as usual Angela did not realize this until, touching the button and turning on the light, she caught sight of Miss Salting straining her face upwards to receive her lover’s kiss.</p>
<h2>Chapter III</h2>
<p>FROM the pinnacle of her satisfaction in her studies, in her new friends and in the joke which she was having upon custom and tradition she looked across the classroom at Miss Powell who preserved her attitude of dignified reserve. Angela thought she would try to break it down; on Wednesday she asked the coloured girl to have lunch with her and was pleased to have the invitation accepted. She had no intention of taking the girl up as a matter either of patronage or of loyalty. But she thought it would be nice to offer her the ordinary amenities which their common student life made natural and possible. Miss Powell it appeared ate generally in an Automat or in a cafeteria, but Angela knew of a nice tearoom. “It’s rather arty, but they do serve a good meal and it’s cheap.” Unfortunately on Wednesday she had to leave before noon; she told Miss Powell to meet her at the little restaurant. “Go in and get a table and wait for me, but I’m sure I’ll be there as soon as you will.” After all she was late, but, what was worse, she found to her dismay that Miss Powell, instead of entering the tearoom, had been awaiting her across the street. There were no tables and the two had to wait almost fifteen minutes before being served.</p>
<p>“Why on earth didn’t you go in?” asked Angela a trifle impatiently, “you could have held the table.” Miss Powell answered imperturbably: “Because I didn’t know how they would receive me if I went in by myself.” Angela could not pretend to misunderstand her. “Oh, I think they would have been all right,” she murmured blushing at her stupidity. How quickly she had forgotten those fears and uncertainties. She had never experienced this sort of difficulty herself, but the certainly knew of them from Virginia and others.</p>
<p>The lunch was not a particularly pleasant one. Either Miss Powell was actually dull or she had made a resolve never to let herself go in the presence of white people; perhaps she feared being misunderstood, perhaps she saw in such encounters a lurking attempt at sociological investigations; she would lend herself to no such procedure, that much was plain. Angela could feel her effort to charm, to invite confidence, glance upon and fall back from this impenetrable armour. She had been amazed to find both Paulette and Martha Burden already gaining their living by their sketches. Miss Burden indeed was a caricaturist of no mean local reputation; Anthony Cross was frankly a commercial artist, though he hoped some day to be a recognised painter of portraits. She was curious to learn of Miss Powell’s prospects. Inquiry revealed that the young lady had one secret aspiration; to win or earn enough money to go to France and then after that, she said with sudden ardour, “anything could happen”. To this end she had worked, saved, scraped, gone without pleasures and clothes. Her work was creditable, indeed above the average, but not sufficiently imbued, Angela thought, with the divine promise to warrant this sublimation of normal desires.</p>
<p>Miss Powell seemed to read her thought. “And then it gives me a chance to show America that one of us can stick; that we have some idea above the ordinary humdrum of existence.”</p>
<p>She made no attempt to return the luncheon but she sent Angela one day a bunch of beautiful jonquils,—and made no further attempt at friendship. To one versed in the psychology of this proud, sensitive people the reason was perfectly plain. “You’ve been awfully nice to me and I appreciate it but don’t think I’m going to thrust myself upon you. Your ways and mine lie along different paths.”</p>
<p>Such contacts, such interpretations and investigations were making up her life, a life that for her was interesting and absorbing, but which had its perils and uncertainties. She had no purpose, for it was absurd for her, even with her ability, to consider Art an end. She was using it now deliberately, as she had always used it vaguely, to get in touch with interesting people and with a more attractive atmosphere. And she was spending money too fast; she had been in New York eight months, and she had already spent a thousand dollars. At this rate her little fortune which had seemed at first inexhaustible would last her less than two years; at best, eighteen months more. Then she must face,—what? Teaching again? Never, she’d had enough of that. Perhaps she could earn her living with her brush, doing menu cards, Christmas and birthday greetings, flowers, Pierrots and Pierrettes on satin pillow tops. She did not relish that. True there were the specialities of Paulette and of Martha Burden, but she lacked the deft sureness of the one and the slightly mordant philosophy underlying the work of the other. Her own speciality she felt sure lay along the line of reproducing, of interpreting on a face the emotion which lay back of that expression. She thought of her Fourteenth Street “types”,—that would be the sort of work which she would really enjoy, that and the depicting of the countenance of a purse-proud but lonely man, of the silken inanity of a society girl, of the smiling despair of a harlot. Even in her own mind she hesitated before the use of that terrible word, but association was teaching her to call a spade a spade.</p>
<p>Yes, she might do worse than follow the example of Mr. Cross and become a portrait painter. But somehow she did not want to have to do this; necessity would, she was sure, spoil her touch; besides, she hated the idea of the position in which she would be placed, fearfully placating and flattering possible patrons, hurrying through with an order because she needed the cheque, accepting patronage and condescension. No, she hoped to be sought after, to have the circumstances which would permit her to pick and choose, to refuse if the whim pleased her. It should mean something to be painted by “Mory”. People would say, “I’m going to have my portrait done by ‘Mory’”. But all this would call for position, power, wealth. And again she said to herself … “I might marry—a white man. Marriage is the easiest way for a woman to get those things, and white men have them.” But she knew only one white man, Anthony Cross, and he would never have those qualities, at least not by his deliberate seeking. They might come eventually but only after long years. Long, long years of struggle with realities. There was a simple, genuine steadfastness in him that made her realize that he would seek for the expression of truth and of himself even at the cost of the trimmings of life. And she was ashamed, for she knew that for the vanities and gewgaws of a leisurely and irresponsible existence she would sacrifice her own talent, the integrity of her ability to interpret life, to write down a history with her brush.</p>
<hr />
<p>Martha Burden was as strong and as pronounced a personage as Paulette; even stronger perhaps because she had the great gift of silence. Paulette, as Angela soon realized, lived in a state of constant defiance. “I don’t care what people think,” was her slogan; men and women appealed to her in proportion to the opposition which they, too, proclaimed for the established thing. Angela was surprised that she clung as persistently as she did to a friendship with a person as conventional and reactionary as herself. But Martha Burden was not like that. One could not tell whether or not she was thinking about other people’s opinions. It was probable that the other people and their attitude never entered her mind. She was cool and slightly aloof, with the coolness and aloofness of her slaty eyes and her thick, tawny hair. Neither the slatiness nor the tawniness proclaimed warmth—only depth, depth and again depth. It was impossible to realize what she would be like if impassioned or deeply stirred to anger. There would probably be something implacable, god-like about her; she would be capable of a long, slow, steady burning of passion. Few men would love Martha though many might admire her. But a man once enchanted might easily die for her.</p>
<p>Angela liked her house with its simple elegance, its fine, soft curtains and steady, shaded glow of light that stood somehow for home. She liked her husband, Ladislas Starr, whom Martha produced without a shade of consciousness that this was the first intimation she had given of being married. They were strong individualists, molten and blended in a design which failed to obscure their emphatic personalities. Their apartment in the Village was large and neat and sunny; it bore no trace of palpable wealth, yet nothing conducing to comfort was lacking. Bookcases in the dining-room and living-room spilled over; the Nation, the Mercury, the Crisis, a magazine of the darker races, left on the broad arm of an easy chair, mutely invited; it was late autumn, almost winter, but there were jars of fresh flowers. The bedroom where Angela went to remove her wrap was dainty and restful.</p>
<p>The little gathering to which Martha had invited her was made up of members as strongly individual as the host and hostess. They were all specialists in their way, and specialists for the most part in some offshoot of a calling or movement which was itself already highly specialized. Martha presented a psychiatrist, a war correspondent,—“I’m that only when there is a war of course,” he explained to Angela’s openly respectful gaze,—a dramatist, a corporation lawyer, a white-faced, conspicuously beautiful poet with a long evasive Russian name, two press agents, a theatrical manager, an actress who played only Shakespeare rôles, a teacher of defective children and a medical student who had been a conscientious objector and had served a long time at Leavenworth. He lapsed constantly into a rapt self-communing from which he only roused himself to utter fiery tirades against the evils of society.</p>
<p>In spite of their highly specialised interests they were all possessed of a common ground of knowledge in which such subjects as Russia, Consumers’ Leagues, and the coming presidential election figured most largely. There was much laughter and chaffing but no airiness, no persiflage. One of the press agents, Mrs. Cecil, entered upon a long discussion with the corporation lawyer on a Bill pending before Congress; she knew as much as he about the matter and held her own in a long and almost bitter argument which only the coming of refreshments broke up.</p>
<p>Just before the close of the argument two other young men had come in, but Angela never learned their vocation. Furthermore she was interested in observing the young teacher of defective children. She was coloured; small and well-built, exquisitely dressed, and of a beautiful tint, all bronze and soft red, “like Jinny” thought Angela, a little astonished to observe how the warmth of her appearance overshadowed or rather overshone everyone else in the room. The tawniness even of Miss Burden’s hair went dead beside her. The only thing to cope with her richness was the classical beauty of the Russian poet’s features. He seemed unable to keep his eyes away from her; was punctiliously attentive to her wants and leaned forward several times during the long political discussion to whisper low spoken and apparently amusing comments. The young woman, perfectly at ease in her deep chair, received his attentions with a slightly detached, amused objectivity; an objectivity which she had for everyone in the room including Angela at whom she had glanced once rather sharply. But the detachment of her manner was totally different from Miss Powell’s sensitive dignity. Totally without self-consciousness she let her warm dark eyes travel from one face to another. She might have been saying: “How far you are away from the things that really matter, birth and death and hard, hard work!” The Russian poet must have realized this, for once Angela heard him say, leaning forward, “You think all this is futile, don’t you?”</p>
<p>Martha motioned for her to wait a moment until most of the other guests had gone, then she came forward with one of the two young men who had come in without introduction. “This is Roger Fielding, he’ll see you home.”</p>
<p>He was tall and blond with deeply blue eyes which smiled on her as he said: “Would you like to walk or ride? It’s raining a little.”</p>
<p>Angela said she preferred to walk.</p>
<p>“All right then. Here, Starr, come across with that umbrella I lent you.”</p>
<p>They went out into the thin, tingling rain of late Autumn. “I was surprised,” said Roger, “to see you there with the high-brows. I didn’t think you looked that way when I met you at Paulette’s.”</p>
<p>“We’ve met before? I’m—I’m sorry, but I don’t seem to remember you.”</p>
<p>“No I don’t suppose you would. Well, we didn’t exactly meet; I saw you one day at Paulette’s. That’s why I came this evening, because I heard you’d be here and I’d get a chance to see you again; but I was surprised because you didn’t seem like that mouthy bunch. They make me tired taking life so plaguey seriously. Martha and her old high-brows!” he ended ungratefully.</p>
<p>Angela, a little taken back with the frankness of his desire to meet her, said she hadn’t thought they were serious.</p>
<p>“Not think them serious? Great Scott! what kind of talk are you used to? You look as though you’d just come out of a Sunday-school! Do you prefer bible texts?”</p>
<p>But she could not explain to him the picture which she saw in her mind of men and women at her father’s home in Opal Street,—the men talking painfully of rents, of lynchings, of building and loan associations; the women of child-bearing and the sacrifices which must be made to put Gertie through school, to educate Howard. “I don’t mean for any of my children to go through what I did.” And in later years in her own first maturity, young Henson and Sawyer and the others in the tiny parlour talking of ideals and inevitable sacrifices for the race; the burnt-offering of individualism for some dimly glimpsed racial whole. This was seriousness, even sombreness, with a great sickening vital upthrust of reality. But these other topics, peaks of civilization superimposed upon peaks, she found, even though interesting, utterly futile.</p>
<p>They had reached the little hall now. “We must talk loud,” she whispered.</p>
<p>“Why?” he asked, speaking obediently very loud indeed.</p>
<p>“Wait a minute; no, she’s not there. The girl above me meets her young man here at night and just as sure as I forget her and come in quietly there they are in the midst of a kiss. I suspect she hates me.”</p>
<p>In his young male sophistication he thought at first that this was a lead, but her air was so gay and so childishly guileless that he changed his opinion. “Though no girl in this day and time could be as simple and innocent as she looks.”</p>
<p>But aloud he said, “Of course she doesn’t hate you, nobody could do that. I assure you I don’t.”</p>
<p>She thought his gallantries very amusing. “Well, it relieves me to hear you say so; that’ll keep me from worrying for one night at least.” And withdrawing her hand from his retaining grasp, she ran upstairs.</p>
<p>A letter from Virginia lay inside the door. Getting ready for bed she read it in bits.</p>
<p>“Angela darling, wouldn’t it be fun if I were to come to New York too? Of course you’d keep on living in your Village and I’d live in famous Harlem, but we’d both be in the same city, which is where two only sisters ought to be,—dumb I calls it to live apart the way we do. The man out at the U. of P. is crazy to have me take an exam. in music; it would be easy enough and much better pay than I get here. So there are two perfectly good reasons why I should come. He thinks I’ll do him credit and I want to get away from this town.”</p>
<p>Then between the lines the real reason betrayed itself:</p>
<p>“I do have such awful luck. Edna Brown had a party out in Merion not long ago and Matthew took me. And you know what riding in a train can do for me,—well that night of all nights I had to become car-sick. Matthew had been so nice. He came to see me the next morning, but, child, he’s never been near me from that day to this. I suppose a man can’t get over a girl’s being such a sight as I was that night. Can’t things be too hateful!”</p>
<p>Angela couldn’t help murmuring: “Imagine anyone wanting old Matthew so badly that she’s willing to break up her home to get over him. Now why couldn’t he have liked her instead of me?”</p>
<p>And pondering on such mysteries she crept into bed. But she fell to thinking again about the evening she had spent with Martha and the people whom she had met. And again it seemed to her that they represented an almost alarmingly unnecessary class. If any great social cataclysm were to happen they would surely be the first to be swept out of the running. Only the real people could survive. Even Paulette’s mode of living, it seemed to her, had something more forthright and vital.</p>
<h2>Chapter IV</h2>
<p>IN the morning she was awakened by the ringing of the telephone. The instrument was an extravagance, for, save for Anthony’s, she received few calls and made practically none. But the woman from whom she had taken the apartment had persuaded her into keeping it. Still, as she had never indicated the change in ownership, its value was small. She lay there for a moment blinking drowsily in the thin but intensely gold sunshine of December thinking that her ears were deceiving her.</p>
<p>Finally she reached out a rosy arm, curled it about the edge of the door jamb and, reaching the little table that stood in the other room just on the other side of the door, set the instrument up in her bed. The apartment was so small that almost everything was within arm’s reach.</p>
<p>“Hello,” she murmured sleepily.</p>
<p>“Oh, I thought you must be there; I said to myself: ‘She couldn’t have left home this early’. What time do you go to that famous drawing class of yours anyway?”</p>
<p>“I beg your pardon! Who is this speaking, please?”</p>
<p>“Why, Roger, of course,—Roger Fielding. Don’t say you’ve forgotten me already. This is Angèle, isn’t it?”</p>
<p>“Yes this is Angèle Mory speaking, Mr. Fielding.”</p>
<p>“Did I offend your Highness, Miss Mory? Will you have lunch with me to-day and let me tell you how sorry I am?”</p>
<p>But she was lunching with Anthony. “I have an engagement.”</p>
<p>“Of course you have. Well, will you have tea, dinner, supper to-day,—breakfast and all the other meals tomorrow and so on for a week? You might just as well say ‘yes’ because I’ll pester you till you do.”</p>
<p>“I’m engaged for tea, too, but I’m not really as popular as I sound. That’s my last engagement for this week; I’ll be glad to have dinner with yo</p>
<p>u.”</p>
<p>“Right-oh! Now don’t go back and finish up that beauty sleep, for if you’re any more charming than you were last night I won’t answer for myself. I’ll be there at eight.”</p>
<p>Inexperienced as she was, she was still able to recognize his method as a bit florid; she preferred, on the whole, Anthony’s manner at lunch when he leaned forward and touching her hand very lightly said: “Isn’t it great for us to be here! I’m so content, Angèle. Promise me you’ll have lunch with me every day this week. I’ve had a streak of luck with my drawings.”</p>
<p>She promised him, a little thrilled herself with his evident sincerity and with the niceness of the smile which so transfigured his dark, thin face, robbing it of its tenseness and strain.</p>
<p>Still something, some vanity, some vague premonition of adventure, led her to linger over her dressing for the dinner with Roger. There was never very much colour in her cheeks, but her skin was warm and white; there was vitality beneath her pallor; her hair was warm, too, long and thick and yet so fine that it gave her little head the effect of being surrounded by a nimbus of light; rather wayward, glancing, shifting light for there were little tendrils and wisps and curls in front and about the temples which no amount of coaxing could subdue. She touched up her mouth a little, not so much to redden it as to give a hint of the mondaine to her appearance. Her dress was flame-colour—Paulette had induced her to buy it,—of a plain, rather heavy beautiful glowing silk. The neck was high in back and girlishly modest in front. She had a string of good artificial pearls and two heavy silver bracelets. Thus she gave the effect of a flame herself; intense and opaque at the heart where her dress gleamed and shone, transparent and fragile where her white warm neck and face rose into the tenuous shadow of her hair. Her appearance excited herself.</p>
<p>Roger found her delightful. As to women he considered himself a connoisseur. This girl pleased him in many respects. She was young; she was, when lighted from within by some indescribable mechanism, even beautiful; she had charm and, what was for him even more important, she was puzzling. In repose, he noticed, studying her closely, her quiet look took on the resemblance of an arrested movement, a composure on tip-toe so to speak, as though she had been stopped in the swift transition from one mood to another. And back of that momentary cessation of action one could see a mind darting, quick, restless, indefatigable, observing, tabulating, perhaps even mocking. She had for him the quality of the foreigner, but she gave this quality an objectivity as though he were the stranger and she the well-known established personage taking note of his peculiarities and apparently boundlessly diverted by them.</p>
<p>But of all this Angela was absolutely unaware. No wonder she was puzzling to Roger, for, in addition to the excitement which she—a young woman in the high tide of her youth, her health, and her beauty—would be feeling at receiving in the proper setting the devotion and attention which all women crave, she was swimming in the flood of excitement created by her unique position. Stolen waters are the sweetest. And Angela never forgot that they were stolen. She thought: “Here I am having everything that a girl ought to have just because I had sense enough to suit my actions to my appearance.” The realization, the secret fun bubbling back in some hidden recess of her heart, brought colour to her cheeks, a certain temerity to her manner. Roger pondered on this quality. If she were reckless!</p>
<p>The dinner was perfect; it was served with elegance and beauty. Indeed she was surprised at the surroundings, the grandeur even of the hotel to which he had brought her. She had no idea of his means, but had supposed that his circumstances were about those of her other new friends; probably he was better off than Anthony, whose poverty she instinctively sensed, and she judged that his income, whatever it might be, was not so perilous as Paulette’s. But she would have put him on the same footing as the Starrs. This sort of expenditure, however, meant money, “unless he really does like me and is splurging this time just for me”. The idea appealed to her vanity and gave her a sense of power; she looked at Roger with a warm smile. At once his intent, considering gaze filmed; he was already leaning toward her but he bent even farther across the perfect little table and asked in a low, eager tone: “Shall we stay here and dance or go to your house and talk and smoke a bit?”</p>
<p>“Oh we’ll stay and dance; it would be so late by the time we get home that we’d only have a few minutes.”</p>
<p>Presently the golden evening was over and they were in the vestibule at Jayne Street. Roger said very loudly: “Where’s that push button?” Then lower: “Well, your young lovers aren’t here tonight either. I’m beginning to think you made that story up, Angèle.”</p>
<p>She assured him, laughing, that she had told the truth. “You come here some time and you’ll see them for yourself.” But she wished she could think of something more ordinary to say. His hands held hers very tightly; they were very strong and for the first time she noticed that the veins stood up on them like cords. She tried to pull her own away and he released them and, taking her key, turned the lock in the inner door, then stood looking down at her.</p>
<p>“Well I’m glad they’re not here tonight to take their revenge.” And as he handed her back the key he kissed her on the lips. His knowledge of women based on many, many such experiences, told him that her swift retreat was absolutely unfeigned.</p>
<p>As on a former occasion she stood, after she had gained her room, considering herself in the glass. She had been kissed only once before, by Matthew Henson, and that kiss had been neither as casual nor as disturbing as this. She was thrilled, excited, and vaguely displeased. “He is fresh, I’ll say that for him.” And subsiding into the easy chair she thought for a long time of Anthony Cross and his deep respectful ardour.</p>
<p>In the morning there were flowers.</p>
<p>From the classroom she went with Paulette to deliver the latter’s sketches. “Have tea to-day with me; we’ll blow ourselves at the Ritz. This is the only time in the month that I have any money, so we’ll make the best of it.”</p>
<p>Angela looked about the warm, luxurious room at the serene, luxurious women, the super-groomed, super-deferential, tremendously confident men. She sighed. “I love all this, love it.”</p>
<p>Paulette, busy blowing smoke-rings, nodded. “I blew sixteen that time. Watch me do it again. There’s nothing really to this kind of life, you know.”</p>
<p>“Oh don’t blow smoke-rings! It’s the only thing in the world that can spoil your looks. What do you mean there’s nothing to it?”</p>
<p>“Well for a day-in-and-day-out existence, it just doesn’t do. It’s too boring. It’s fun for you and me to drift in here twice a year when we’ve just had a nice, fat cheque which we’ve got to spend. But there’s nothing to it for every day; it’s too much like reaching the harbour where you would be. The tumult and the shouting are all over. I’d rather live just above the danger line down on little old Bank Street, and think up a way to make five hundred dollars so I could go to the French Riviera second class and bum around those little towns, Villefranche, Beaulieu, Cagnes,—you must see them, Angèle—and have a spanking affair with a real man with honest to God blood in his veins than to sit here and drink tea and listen to the nothings of all these tame tigers, trying you out, seeing how much it will take to buy you.”</p>
<p>Angela was bewildered by this outburst. “I thought you said you didn’t like affairs unless you could conduct them in your own pied à terre.”</p>
<p>“Did I? Well that was another time—not to-day. By the way, what would you say if I were to tell you that I’m going to Russia?”</p>
<p>She glanced at her friend with the bright shamelessness of a child, for she knew that Angela had heard of Jack Hudson’s acceptance as newspaper correspondent in Moscow.</p>
<p>“I wouldn’t say anything except that I’d much rather be here in the warmth and cleanliness of the Ritz than be in Moscow where I’m sure it will be cold and dirty.”</p>
<p>“That’s because you’ve never wanted anyone.” Her face for a moment was all desire. Beautiful but terrible too. “She actually looks like Hetty Daniels,” thoug</p>
<p>ht Angela in astonishment. Only, alas, there was no longer any beauty in Hetty’s face.</p>
<p>“When you’ve set your heart on anybody or on anything there’ll be no telling what you’ll do, Angèle. For all your innocence you’re as deep, you’ll be as desperate as Martha Burden once you’re started. I know your kind. Well, if you must play around in the Ritz, etcet., etcet., I’ll tell Roger Fielding. He’s a good squire and he can afford it.”</p>
<p>“Why? Is he so rich?”</p>
<p>“Rich! If all the wealth that he—no, not he, but his father—if all the wealth that old man Fielding possesses were to be converted into silver dollars there wouldn’t be space enough in this room, big as it is, to hold it.”</p>
<p>Angela tried to envisage it. “And Roger, what does he do?”</p>
<p>“Spend it. What is there for him to do? Nothing except have a good time and keep in his father’s good graces. His father’s some kind of a personage and all that, you know, crazy about his name and his posterity. Roger doesn’t dare get drunk and lie in the gutter and he mustn’t make a misalliance. Outside of that the world’s his oyster and he eats it every day. There’s a boy who gets everything he wants.”</p>
<p>“What do you mean by a misalliance? He’s not royalty.”</p>
<p>“Spoken like a good American. No, he’s not. But he mustn’t marry outside certain limits. No chorus girl romances for his father. The old man wouldn’t care a rap about money but he would insist on blue blood and the Mayflower. The funny thing is that Roger, for all his appearing so democratic, is that way too. But of course he’s been so run after the marvel is that he’s as unspoiled as he is. But it’s the one thing I can’t stick in him. I don’t mind a man’s not marrying me; but I can’t forgive him if he thinks I’m not good enough to marry him. Any woman is better than the best of men.” Her face took on its intense, burning expression; one would have said she was consumed with excitement.</p>
<p>Angela nodded, only half-listening. Roger a multi-millionaire! Roger who only two nights ago had kissed and mumbled her fingers, his eyes avid and yet so humble and beseeching!</p>
<p>“One thing, if you do start playing around with Roger be careful. He’s a good bit of a rotter, and he doesn’t care what he says or spends to gain his ends.” She laughed at the inquiry in her friend’s eyes. “No, I’ve never given Roger five minutes’ thought. But I know his kind. They’re dangerous. It’s wrong for men to have both money and power; they’re bound to make some woman suffer. Come on up the Avenue with me and I’ll buy a hat. I can’t wear this whang any longer. It’s too small, looks like a peanut on a barrel.”</p>
<p>Angela was visual minded. She saw the days of the week, the months of the year in little narrow divisions of space. She saw the past years of her life falling into separate, uneven compartments whose ensemble made up her existence. Whenever she looked back on this period from Christmas to Easter she saw a bluish haze beginning in a white mist and flaming into something red and terrible; and across the bluish haze stretched the name: Roger.</p>
<p>Roger! She had never seen anyone like him: so gay, so beautiful, like a blond, glorious god, so overwhelming, so persistent. She had not liked him so much at first except as one likes the sun or the sky or a singing bird, anything jolly and free. There had been no touching points for their minds. He knew nothing of life except what was pleasurable; it is true his idea of the pleasurable did not always coincide with hers. He had no fears, no restraints, no worries. Yes, he had one; he did not want to offend his father. He wanted ardently and unswervingly his father’s money. He did not begrudge his senior a day, an hour, a moment of life; about this he had a queer, unselfish sincerity. The old financial war horse had made his fortune by hard labour and pitiless fighting. He had given Roger his being, the entrée into a wonderful existence. Already he bestowed upon him an annual sum which would have kept several families in comfort. If Roger had cared to save for two years he need never have asked his father for another cent. With any kind of luck he could have built up for himself a second colossal fortune. But he did not care to do this. He did not wish his father one instant’s loss of life or of its enjoyment. But he did want final possession of those millions.</p>
<p>Angela liked him best when he talked about “my dad”; he never mentioned the vastness of his wealth, but by now she could not have helped guessing even without Paulette’s aid that he was a wealthy man. She would not take jewellery from him, but there was a steady stream of flowers, fruit, candy, books, fine copies of the old masters. She was afraid and ashamed to express a longing in his presence. And with all this his steady, constant attendance. And an odd watchfulness which she felt but could not explain.</p>
<p>“He must love me,” she said to herself, thinking of his caresses. She had been unable to keep him from kissing her. Her uneasiness had amused and charmed him: he laughed at her Puritanism, succeeded in shaming her out of it. “Child, where have you lived? Why there’s nothing in a kiss. If I didn’t kiss you I couldn’t come to see you. And I have to see you, Angèle!” His voice grew deep; the expression in his eyes made her own falter.</p>
<p>Yet he did not ask her to marry him. “But I suppose it’s because he can see I don’t love him yet.” And she wondered what it would be like to love. Even Jinny knew more about this than she, for she had felt, perhaps still did feel, a strong affection for Matthew Henson. Well, anyway, if they married she would probably come to love him; most women learned to love their husbands. At first after her conversation with Paulette about Roger she had rather expected a diminution at any time of his attentions, for after all she was unknown; from Roger’s angle she would be more than outside the pale. But she was sure now that he loved and would want to marry her, for it never occurred to her that men bestowed attentions such as these on a passing fancy. She saw her life rounding out like a fairy tale. Poor, coloured—coloured in America; unknown, a nobody! And here at her hand was the forward thrust shadow of love and of great wealth. She would do lots of good among coloured people; she would see that Miss Powell, for instance, had her scholarship. Oh she would hunt out girls and men like Seymour Porter,—she had almost forgotten his name,—or was it Arthur Sawyer?—and give them a taste of life in its fullness and beauty such as they had never dreamed of.</p>
<p>Tonight she was to go out with Roger. She wore her flame-coloured dress again; a pretty green one was also hanging up in her closet, but she wore the flame one because it lighted her up from within—lighted not only her lovely, fine body but her mind too. Her satisfaction with her appearance let loose some inexplicable spring of gaiety and merriment and simplicity so that she seemed almost daring.</p>
<p>Roger, sitting opposite, tried to probe her mood, tried to gauge the invitation of her manner and its possibilities. She touched him once or twice, familiarly; he thought almost possessively. She seemed to be within reach now if along with that accessibility she had recklessness. It was this attribute which for the first time tonight he thought to divine within her. If in addition to her insatiable interest in life—for she was always asking him about people and places,—she possessed this recklessness, then indeed he might put to her a proposal which had been hanging on his lips for weeks and months. Something innocent, pathetically untouched about her had hitherto kept him back. But if she had the requisite daring! They were dining in East Tenth Street in a small cafè—small contrasted with the Park Avenue Hotel to which he had first taken her. But about them stretched the glitter and perfection of crystal and silver, of marvellous napery and of obsequious service. Everything, Angela thought, looking about her, was translated. The slight odour of food was, she told Fielding, really an aroma: the mineral water which he was drinking because he could not help it and she because she could not learn to like wine, was nectar; the bread, the fish, the courses were ambrosia. The food, too, in general was to be spoken of as viands.</p>
<p>“Vittles, translated,” she said laughing.</p>
<p>“And you, you, too, are translated. Angèle, you are wonderful, you are charming,” his lips answered but his senses beat and hammered. Intoxicated with the magic of the moment and the surroundings, she turned her smiling countenance a little nearer, and saw his face change, darken. A cloud over the sun.</p>
<p>“Excuse me,” he said and walked hastily across the room back of her. In astonishment she turned and looked after him. At a table behind her three coloured people (under the direction of a puzzled and troubled waiter,) were about to take a table. Roger went up and spoke to the headwaiter authoritatively, even angrily. The latter glanced about the room, nodded obsequiously and crossing, addressed the little group. There was a hasty, slightly acrid discussion. Then the three filed out, past Angela’s table this time, their heads high.</p>
<p>She turned back to her plate, her heart sick. For her the evening was ended. Roger came back, his face flushed, triumphant, “Well I put a spoke in the wheel of those ‘coons’! They forget themselves so quickly, coming in here spoiling white people’s appetites. I told the manager if they brought one of their damned suits I’d be responsible. I wasn’t going to have them here with you, Angèle. I could tell that night at Martha Burden’s by the way you looked at that girl that you had no time for darkies. I’ll bet you’d never been that near to one before in your life, had you? Wonder where Martha picked that one up.”</p>
<p>She was silent, lifeless. He went on recounting instances of how effectively he had “spoked the wheel” of various coloured people. He had blackballed Negroes in Harvard, aspirants for small literary or honour societies. “I’d send ’em all back to Africa if I could. There’s been a darkey up in Harlem’s got the right idea, I understand; though he must be a low brute to cave in on his race that way; of course it’s merely a matter of money with him. He’d betray them all for a few thousands. Gosh, if he could really pull it through I don’t know but what I’d be willing to finance it.”</p>
<p>To this tirade there were economic reasons to oppose, tenets of justice, high ideals of humanity. But she could think of none of them. Speechless, she listened to him, her appetite fled.</p>
<p>“What’s the matter, Angèle? Did it make you sick to see them?”</p>
<p>“No, no not that. I—I don’t mind them; you’re mistaken about me and that girl at Martha Burden’s. It’s you, you’re so violent. I didn’t know you were that way!”</p>
<p>“And I’ve made you afraid of me? Oh, I don’t want to do that.” But he was flattered to think that he had affected her. “See here, let’s get some air. I’ll take you for a spin around the Park and then run you home.”</p>
<p>But she did not want to go to the Park; she wanted to go home immediately. His little blue car was outside; in fifteen minutes they were at Jayne Street. She would not permit him to come inside, not even in the vestibule; she barely gave him her hand.</p>
<p>“But Angèle, you can’t leave me like this; why what have I done? Did it frighten you because I swore a little? But I’d never swear at you. Don’t go like this.”</p>
<p>She was gone, leaving him staring and nonplussed on the sidewalk. Lighting a cigarette, he climbed back in his car. “Now what the devil!” He shifted his gears. “But she likes me. I’d have sworn she liked me tonight. Those damn niggers! I bet she’s thinking about me this minute.”</p>
<p>He would have lost his bet. She was thinking about the coloured people.</p>
<p>She could visualize them all so plainly; she could interpret their changing expressions as completely as though those changes lay before her in a book. There were a girl and two men, one young, the other the father perhaps of either of the other two. The fatherly-looking person, for so her mind docketed him, bore an expression of readiness for any outcome whatever. She knew and understood the type. His experiences of surprises engendered by this thing called prejudice had been too vast for them to appear to him as surprises. If they were served this was a lucky day; if not he would refuse to let the incident shake his stout spirit.</p>
<p>It was to the young man and the girl that her interest went winging. In the mirror behind Roger she had seen them entering the room and she had thought: “Oh, here are some of them fighting it out again. O God! please let them be served, please don’t let their evening be spoiled.” She was so happy herself and she knew that the reception of fifty other maîtres d’hotel could not atone for a rebuff at the beginning of the game. The young fellow was nervous, his face tense,—thus might he have looked going to meet the enemy’s charge in the recent Great War; but there the odds were even; here the cards were already stacked against him. Presently his expression would change for one of grimness, determination and despair. Talk of a lawsuit would follow; apparently did follow; still a lawsuit at best is a poor substitute for an evening’s fun.</p>
<p>But the girl, the girl in whose shoes she herself might so easily have been! She was so clearly a nice girl, with all that the phrase implies. To Angela watching her intently and yet with the indifference of safety she recalled Virginia, so slender, so appealing she was and so brave. So very brave! Ah, that courage! It affected at first a gay hardihood: “Oh I know it isn’t customary for people like us to come into this café, but everything is going to be all right.” It met Angela’s gaze with a steadiness before which her own quailed, for she thought: “Oh, poor thing! perhaps she thinks that I don’t want her either.” And when the blow had fallen the courage had had to be translated anew into a comforting assurance. “Don’t worry about me, Jimmy,” the watching guest could just hear her. “Indeed, indeed it won’t spoil the evening, I should say not; there’re plenty of places where they’d be all right. We just happened to pick a lemon.”</p>
<p>The three had filed out, their heads high, their gaze poised and level. But the net result of the evening’s adventure would be an increased cynicism in the elderly man, a growing bitterness for the young fellow, and a new timidity in the girl, who, even after they had passed into the street, could not relieve her feelings, for she must comfort her baffled and goaded escort.</p>
<p>Angela wondered if she had been half as consoling to Matthew Henson,—was it just a short year ago? And suddenly, sitting immobile in her arm-chair, her evening cloak slipping unnoticed to the floor, triumph began to mount in her. Life could never cheat her as it had cheated that coloured girl this evening, as it had once cheated her in Philadephia with Matthew. She was free, free to taste life in all its fullness and sweetness, in all its minutest details. By exercising sufficient courage to employ the unique weapon which an accident of heredity had placed in her grasp she was able to master life. How she blessed her mother for showing her the way! In a country where colour or the lack of it meant the difference between freedom and fetters how lucky she was!</p>
<p>But, she told herself, she was through with Roger Fielding.</p>
<h2>Chapter V</h2>
<p>NOW it was Spring, Spring in New York. Washington Square was a riot of greens that showed up bravely against the great red brick houses on its north side. The Arch viewed from Fifth Avenue seemed a gateway to Paradise. The long deep streets running the length of the city invited an exploration to the ends where pots of gold doubtless gleamed. On the short crosswise streets the April sun streamed in splendid banners of deep golden light.</p>
<p>In two weeks Angela had seen Roger only once. He telephoned every day, pleading, beseeching, entreating. On the one occasion when she did permit him to call there were almost tears in his eyes. “But, darling, what did I do? If you’d only tell me that. Perhaps I could explain away whatever it is that’s come between us.” But there was nothing to explain she told him gravely, it was just that he was harder, more cruel than she had expected; no, it wasn’t the coloured people, she lied and felt her soul blushing, it was that now she knew him when he was angry or displeased, and she could see how ruthless, how determined he was to have things his way. His willingness to pay the costs of the possible lawsuit had filled her with a sharp fear. What could one do against a man, against a group of men such as he and his kind represented who would spend time and money to maintain a prejudice based on a silly, time-worn tradition?</p>
<p>Yet she found she did not want to lose sight of him completely. The care, the attention, the flattery with which he had surrounded her were beginning to produce their effect. In the beautiful but slightly wearying balminess of the Spring she missed the blue car which had been constantly at her call; eating a good but homely meal in her little living room with the cooking odours fairly overwhelming her from the kitchenette, she found herself longing unconsciously for the dainty food, the fresh Spring delicacies which she knew he would be only too glad to procure for her. Shamefacedly she had to acknowledge that the separation which she was so rigidly enforcing meant a difference in her tiny exchequer, for it had now been many months since she had regularly taken her main meal by herself and at her own expense.</p>
<p>To-day she was especially conscious of her dependence upon him, for she was to spend the afternoon in Van Cortlandt Park with Anthony. There had been talk of subways and the Elevated. Roger would have had the blue car at the door and she would have driven out of Jayne Street in state. Now it transpired that Anthony was to deliver some drawings to a man, a tricky customer, whom it was best to waylay if possible on Saturday afternoon. Much as he regretted it he would probably be a little late. Angela, therefore, to save time must meet him at Seventy-second Street. Roger would never have made a request like that; he would have brought his lawyer or his business man along in the car with him and, dismissing him with a curt “Well I’ll see if I can finish this tomorrow,” would have hastened to her with his best Walter Raleigh manner, and would have produced the cloak, too, if she would but say so. Perhaps she’d have to take him back. Doubtless later on she could manage his prejudices if only he would speak. But how was she to accomplish that?</p>
<p>Still it was lovely being here with Anthony in the park, so green and fresh, so new with the recurring newness of Spring. Anthony touched her hand and said as he had once before, “I’m so content to be with you, Angel. I may call you Angel, mayn’t I? You are that to me, you know. Oh if you only knew how happy it makes me to be content, to be satisfied like this. I could get down on my knees and thank God for it like a little boy.” He looked like a little boy as he said it. “Happiness is a hard thing to find</p>
<p>and harder still to keep.”</p>
<p>She asked him idly, “Haven’t you always been happy?”</p>
<p>His face underwent a startling change. Not only did the old sadness and strain come back on it, but a great bitterness such as she had never before seen.</p>
<p>“No,” he said slowly as though thinking through long years of his life. “ I haven’t been happy for years, not since I was a little boy. Never once have I been happy nor even at ease until I met you.”</p>
<p>But she did not want him to find his happiness in her. That way would only lead to greater unhappiness for him. So she said, to change the subject: “Could you tell me about it?”</p>
<p>But there was nothing to tell, he assured her, his face growing darker, grimmer. “Only my father was killed when I was a little boy, killed by his enemies. I’ve hated them ever since; I never stopped hating them until I met you.” But this was just as dangerous a road as the other plus the possibilities of re-opening old wounds. So she only shivered and said vaguely, “Oh, that was terrible! Too terrible to talk about. I’m sorry, Anthony!” And then as a last desperate topic: “Are you ever going back to Brazil?” For she knew that he had come to the United States from Rio de Janeiro. He had spent Christmas at her house, and had shown her pictures of the great, beautiful city and of his mother, a slender, darkeyed woman with a perpetual sadness in her eyes.</p>
<p>The conversation languished, She thought: “It must be terrible to be a man and to have these secret hates and horrors back of one.” Some Spanish feud, a matter of hot blood and ready knives, a sudden stroke, and then this deadly memory for him.</p>
<p>“No,” he said after a long pause. “I’m never going back to Brazil. I couldn’t.” He turned to her suddenly. “Tell me, Angel, what kind of girl are you, what do you think worth while? Could you, for the sake of love, for the sake of being loyal to the purposes and vows of someone you loved, bring yourself to endure privation and hardship and misunderstanding, hardship that would be none the less hard because it really could be avoided?”</p>
<p>She thought of her mother who had loved her father so dearly, and of the washdays which she had endured for him, the long years of household routine before she and Jinny had been old enough to help her first with their hands and then with their earnings. She thought of the little, dark, shabby house, of the made-over dresses and turned coats. And then she saw Roger and his wealth and his golden recklessness, his golden keys which could open the doors to beauty and ease and—decency! Oh, it wasn’t decent for women to have to scrub and work and slave and bear children and sacrifice their looks and their pretty hands,—she saw her mother’s hands as they had always looked on wash day, they had a white, boiled appearance. No, she would not fool herself nor Anthony. She was no sentimentalist. It was not likely that she, a girl who had left her little sister and her home to go out to seek life and happiness, would throw it over for poverty,—hardship. If a man loved a woman how could he ask her that?</p>
<p>So she told him gently: “No, Anthony, I couldn’t,” and watched the blood drain from his face and the old look of unhappiness drift into his eyes.</p>
<p>He answered inadequately. “No, of course you couldn’t.” And turning over—he had been sitting on the grass at her feet—he lay face downward on the scented turf. Presently he sat up and giving her a singularly sweet but wistful smile, said: “I almost touched happiness, Angèle. Did you by any chance ever happen to read Browning’s ‘Two in the Roman Campagna’?”</p>
<p>But she had read very little poetry except what had been required in her High School work, and certainly not Browning.</p>
<p>He began to interpret the fragile, difficult beauty of the poem with its light but sure touch on evanescent, indefinable feeling. He quoted:</p>
<p>“How is it under our control</p>
<p>To love or not to love?”</p>
<p>And again:</p>
<p>“Infinite yearning and the pang</p>
<p>Of finite hearts that yearn.”</p>
<p>They were silent for a long time. And again she wondered how it would feel to love. He watched the sun drop suddenly below some tree tops and rose to his feet shivering a little as though its disappearance had made him immediately cold.</p>
<p>“‘So the good moment goes.’ Come, Angel, we’ll have to hasten. It’s getting dark and it’s a long walk to the subway.”</p>
<p>The memory of the afternoon stayed by her, shrouding her thoughts, clinging to them like a tenuous, adhering mantle. But she said to herself: “There’s no use thinking about that. I’m not going to live that kind of life.” And she knew she wanted Roger and what he could give her and the light and gladness which he always radiated. She wanted none of Anthony’s poverty and privation and secret vows,—he meant, she supposed, some promise to devote himself to REAL ART,—her visual mind saw it in capitals. Well, she was sick of tragedy, she belonged to a tragic race. “God knows it’s time for one member of it to be having a little fun.”</p>
<p>“Yes,” she thought all through her class, painting furiously—for she had taken up her work in earnest since Christmas—“yes, I’ll just make up my mind to it. I’ll take Roger back and get married and settle down to a pleasant, safe, beautiful life.” And useful. It should be very useful. Perhaps she’d win Roger around to helping coloured people. She’d look up all sorts of down-and-outers and give them a hand. And she’d help Anthony, at least she’d offer to help him; she didn’t believe he would permit her.</p>
<p>Coming out of the building a thought occurred to her: “Take Roger back, but back to what? To his old status of admiring, familiar, generous friend? Just that and no more?” Here was her old problem again. She stopped short to consider it.</p>
<p>Martha Burden overtook her. “Planning the great masterpiece of the ages, Angèle? Better come along and work it out by my fireside. I can give you some tea. Are you coming?”</p>
<p>“Yes,” said Angela, still absorbed.</p>
<p>“Well,” said Martha after they had reached the house. “I’ve never seen any study as deep as that. Come out of it Angèle, you’ll drown. You’re not by any chance in love, are you?”</p>
<p>“No,” she replied, “at least I don’t know. But tell me, Martha, suppose—suppose I were in love with one of them, what do you do about it, how do you get them to propose?”</p>
<p>Martha lay back and laughed. “Such candour have I not met, no, not in all Flapperdom. Angèle, if I could answer that I’d be turning women away from my door and handing out my knowledge to the ones I did admit at a hundred dollars a throw.”</p>
<p>“But there must be some way. Oh, of course, I know lots of them propose, but how do you get a proposal from the ones you want,—the,—the interesting ones?”</p>
<p>“You really want to know? The only answer I can give you is Humpty Dumpty’s dictum to Alice about verbs and adjectives: ‘It depends on which is the stronger.” She interpreted for her young guest was clearly mystified. “It depends on (A) whether you are strong enough to make him like you more than you like him; (B) whether if you really do like him more than he does you you can conceal it. In other words, so far as liking is concerned you must always be ahead of the game, you must always like or appear to like him a little less than he does you. And you must make him want you. But you mustn’t give. Oh yes, I know that men are always wanting women to give, but they don’t want the women to want to give. They want to take,—or at any rate to compel the giving.”</p>
<p>“It sounds very complicated, like some subtle game.”</p>
<p>A deep febrile light came into Martha’s eyes. “It is a game, and the hardest game in the world for a woman, but the most fascinating; the hardest in which to strike a happy medium. You see, you have to be careful not to withhold too much and yet to give very little. If we don’t give enough we lose them. If we give too much we lose ourselves. Oh, Angèle, God doesn’t like women.”</p>
<p>“But,” said Angela thinking of her own mother, “there are some women who give all and men like them the better for it.”</p>
<p>“Oh, yes, that’s true. Those are the blessed among women. They ought to get down on their knees every day and thank God for permitting them to be their normal selves and not having to play a game.” For a moment her still, proud face broke into deeps of pain. “Oh, Angèle, think of loving and never, never being able to show it until you’re asked for it; think of living a game every hour of your life!” Her face quivered back to its normal immobility.</p>
<p>Angela walked home through the purple twilight musing no longer on her own case but on this unexpected revelation. “Well,” she said, “I certainly shouldn’t like to love like that.” She thought of Anthony: “A woman could be her true self with him.” But she had given him up.</p>
<p>If the thing to do were to play a game she would play one. Indeed she rather enjoyed the prospect. She was playing a game now, a game against public tradition on the one hand and family instinct on the other; the stakes were happiness and excitement, and almost anyone looking at the tricks which she had already taken would prophesy that she would be the winner. She decided to follow all the rules as laid down by Martha Burden and to add any workable ideas of her own. When Roger called again she was still unable to see him, but her voice was a shade less curt over the telephone; she did not cut him off so abruptly. “I must not withhold too much,” she reminded herself. He was quick to note the subtle change in intonation. “But you’re going to let me come to see you soon, Angèle,” he pleaded. “You wouldn’t hold out this way against me forever. Say when I may come.”</p>
<p>“Oh, one of these days; I must go now, Roger. Goodbye.”</p>
<p>After the third call she let him come to spend Friday evening. She heard the blue car rumbling in the street and a few minutes later he came literally staggering into the living-room so laden was he with packages. Flowers, heaps of spring posies had come earlier in the day, lilacs, jonquils, narcissi. Now this evening there were books and candy, handkerchiefs,—“they were so dainty and they looked just like you,” he said fearfully, for she had never taken an article of dress from him,—two pictures, a palette and some fine brushes and last a hamper of all sorts of delicacies. “I thought if you didn’t mind we’d have supper here; it would be fun with just us two.”</p>
<p>How much he pleased her he could not divine; it was the first time he had ever given a hint of any desire for sheer domesticity. Anthony had sought nothing better than to sit and smoke and watch her flitting about in her absurd red or violet apron. Matthew Henson had been speechless with ecstasy when on a winter night she had allowed him to come into the kitchen while she prepared for him a cup of cocoa. But Roger’s palate had been so flattered by the concoctions of chefs famous in London, Paris and New York that he had set no store by her simple cooking. Indeed his inevitable comment had been: “Here, what do you want to get yourself all tired out for? Let’s go to a restaurant. It’s heaps less bother.”</p>
<p>But tonight he, too, watched her with humble, delighted eyes. She realized that he was conscious of her every movement; once he tried to embrace her, but she whirled out of his reach without reproach but with decision. He subsided, too thankful to be once more in her presence to take any risks. And when he left he had kissed her hand.</p>
<p>She began going about with him again, but with condescension, with kindness. And with the new vision gained from her talk with Martha she could see his passion mounting. “Make him want you,”—that was the second rule. It was clear that he did, no man could be as persevering as this otherwise. Still he did not speak. They were to meet that afternoon in front of the school to go “anywhere you want, dear, I’m yours to command”. It was the first time that he had called for her at the building, and she came out a little early, for she did not want any of the three, Martha, Paulette, nor Anthony, to see whom she was meeting. It would be better to walk to the corner, she thought, they’d be just that much less likely to recognize him. She heard footsteps hurrying behind her, heard her name and turned to see Miss Powell, pleased and excited. She laid her hand on Angela’s arm but the latter shook her off. Roger must not see her on familiar terms like this with a coloured girl for she felt that the afternoon portended something and she wanted no side issues. The coloured girl gave her a penetrating glance; then her habitual reserve settled down blotting out the eagerness, leaving her face blurred and heavy. “I beg your pardon, Miss Mory, I’m sure,” she murmured and stepped out into the tempestuous traffic of Fourth Avenue. Angela was sorry; she would make it up tomorrow, she thought, but she had not dismissed her a moment too soon for Roger came rushing up, his car resplendent and resplendent himself in a grey suit, soft grey hat and blue tie. Angela looked at him approvingly. “You look just like the men in the advertising pages of the Saturday Evening Post,” she said, and the fact that he did not wince under the compliment proved the depth of his devotion, for every one of his outer garments, hat, shoes, and suit, had been made to measure.</p>
<p>They went to Coney Island. “The ocean will be there, but very few people and only a very few amusements,” said Roger. They had a delightful time; they were like school children, easily and frankly amused; they entered all the booths that were open, ate pop-corn and hot dogs and other local dainties. And presently they were flying home under the double line of trees on Ocean Parkway and entering the bosky loveliness of Prospect Park. Roger slowed down a little.</p>
<p>“Oh,” said Angela. “I love this car.”</p>
<p>He bent toward her instantly. “Does it please you? Did you miss it when you made me stay away from you?”</p>
<p>She was afraid she had made a mistake: “Yes, but that’s not why I let you come back.”</p>
<p>“I know that. But you do like it, don’t you, comfort and beauty and dainty surroundings?”</p>
<p>“Yes,” she said solemnly, “I love them all.”</p>
<p>He was silent then for a long, long time, his face a little set, a worried line on his forehead.</p>
<p>“Well now what’s he thinking about?” she asked herself, watching his hands and their clever manipulation of the steering wheel though his thoughts, she knew, were not on that.</p>
<p>He turned to her with an air of having made up his mind. “Angèle, I want you to promise to spend a day out riding with me pretty soon. I—I have something I want to say to you.” He was a worldly young man about town but he was actually mopping his brow. “I’ve got to go south for a week for my father,—he owns some timber down there with which he used to supply saw-mills but since the damned niggers have started running north it’s been something of a weight on his hands. He wants me to go down and see whether it’s worth his while to hold on to it any longer. It’s so rarely that he asks anything of me along a business line that I’d hate to refuse him. But I’ll be back the morning of the twenty-sixth. I’ll have to spend the afternoon and evening with him out on Long Island but on the twenty-seventh could you go out with me?”</p>
<p>She said as though all this preamble portended nothing: “I couldn’t give you the whole day, but I’d go in the afternoon.”</p>
<p>“Oh,” his face fell a little. “Well, the afternoon then. Only of course we won’t be able to go far out. Perhaps you’d like me to arrange a lunch and we’d go to one of the Parks, Central or the Bronx, or Van Cortlandt,——”</p>
<p>“No, not Van Cortlandt,” she told him. That park was sacred to Anthony Cross.</p>
<p>“Well, wherever you say. We can settle it even that day. The main thing is that you’ll go.”</p>
<p>She said to herself. “Aren’t men funny! He could have asked me five times over while he was making all these arrangements.” But she was immensely relieved, even happy. She felt very kindly toward him; perhaps she was in love after all, only she was not the demonstrative kind. It was too late for him to come in, but they sat in the car in the dark security of Jayne Street and she let him take her in his arms and kiss her again and again. For the first time she returned his kisses.</p>
<hr />
<p>Weary but triumphant she mounted the stairs almost stumbling from a sudden, overwhelming fatigue. She had been under a strain! But it was all over now; she had conquered, she had been the stronger. She had secured not only him but an assured future, wealth, protection, influence, even power. She herself was power,—like the women one reads about, like Cleopatra,—Cleopatra’s African origin intrigued her, it was a fitting comparison. Smiling, she took the last steep stairs lightly, springily, suddenly reinvigorated.</p>
<p>As she opened the door a little heap of letters struck her foot. Switching on the light she sat in the easy chair and incuriously turned them over. They were bills for the most part, she had had to dress to keep herself dainty and desirable for Roger. At the bottom of the heap was a letter from Virginia. When she became Mrs. Roger Fielding she would never have to worry about a bill again; how she would laugh when she remembered the small amounts for which these called! Never again would she feel the slight quake of dismay which always overtook her when she saw the words: “Miss Angèle Mory in account with,——” Outside of the regular monthly statement for gas she had never seen a bill in her father’s house. Well, she’d have no difficulty in getting over her squeamish training.</p>
<p>Finally she opened Jinny’s letter. Her sister had written:</p>
<p>“Angela I’m coming up for an exam on the twenty-eighth. I’ll arrive on the twenty-sixth or I could come the day before. You’ll meet me, won’t you? I know where I’m going to stay,”—she gave an address on 139th Street—“but I don’t know how to get there; I don’t know your school hours, write and tell me so I can arrive when you’re free. There’s no reason why I should put you out.”</p>
<p>So Virginia was really coming to try her luck in New York. It would be nice to have her so near. “Though I don’t suppose we’ll be seeing so much of each other,” she thought, absently reaching for her schedule. “Less than ever now, for I suppose Roger and I will live in Long Island; yes, that would be much wiser. I’ll wear a veil when I go to meet her, for those coloured porters stare at you so and they never forget you.”</p>
<p>The twenty-seventh came on Thursday; she had classes in the morning; well, Jinny would be coming in the afternoon anyway, and after twelve she had,—Oh heavens that was the day, the day she was to go out with Roger, the day that he would put t</p>
<p>he great question. And she wrote to Virginia:</p>
<p>“Come the twenty-sixth, Honey, any time after four. I couldn’t possibly meet you on the twenty-seventh. But the twenty-sixth is all right. Let me know when your train comes in and I’ll be there. And welcome to our city.”</p>
<h2>Chapter VI</h2>
<p>THE week was one of tumult, almost of agony. After all, matters were not completely settled, you never could tell. She would be glad when the twenty-seventh had come and gone, for then, then she would be rooted, fixed. She and Roger would marry immediately. But now he was so far away, in Georgia; she missed him and evidently he missed her for the first two days brought her long telegrams almost letters. “I can think of nothing but next Thursday, are you thinking of it too?” The third day brought a letter which said practically the same thing, adding, “Oh, Angèle; I wonder what you will say!”</p>
<p>“But he could ask me and find out,” she said to herself and suddenly felt assured and triumphant. Every day thereafter brought her a letter reiterating this strain. “And I know how he hates to write!”</p>
<p>The letter on Wednesday read, “Darling, when you get this I’ll actually be in New York; if I can I’ll call you up but I’ll have to rush like mad so as to be free for Thursday, so perhaps I can’t manage.”</p>
<p>She made up her mind not to answer the telephone even if it did ring, she would strike one last note of indifference though only she herself would be aware of it.</p>
<p>It was the day on which Jinny was to arrive. It would be fun to see her, talk to her, hear all the news about the queer, staid people whom she had left so far behind. Farther now than ever. Matthew Henson was still in the post-office, she knew. Arthur Sawyer was teaching at Sixteenth and Fitzwater; she could imagine the sick distaste that mantled his face every time he looked at the hideous, discoloured building. Porter had taken his degree in dentistry but he was not practising, on the contrary he was editing a small weekly, getting deeper, more and more hopelessly into debt she was sure… . It would be fun some day to send him a whopping cheque; after all, he had taken a chance just as she had; she recognized his revolt as akin to her own, only he had not had her luck. She must ask Jinny about all this.</p>
<p>It was too bad that she had to meet her sister,—but she must. Just as likely as not she’d be car sick and then New York was terrifying for the first time to the stranger,—she had known an instant’s sick dread herself that first day when she had stood alone and ignorant in the great rotunda of the station. But she was different from Jinny; nothing about life ever made her really afraid; she might hurt herself, suffer, meet disappointment, but life could not alarm her; she loved to come to grips with it, to force it to a standstill, to yield up its treasures. But Jinny although brave, had secret fears, she was really only a baby. Her little sister! For the first time in months she thought of her with a great surge of sisterly tenderness.</p>
<p>It was time to go. She wore her most unobtrusive clothes, a dark blue suit, a plain white silk shirt, a dark blue, bell-shaped hat—a cloche—small and fitting down close over her eyes. She pulled it down even farther and settled her modish veil well over the tip of her nose. It was one thing to walk about the Village with Miss Powell. There were practically no coloured people there. But this was different. Those curious porters should never be able to recognize her. Seymour Porter had worked among them one summer at Broad Street station in Philadelphia. He used to say: “They aren’t really curious, you know, but their job makes them sick; so they’re always hunting for the romance, for the adventure which for a day at least will take the curse off the monotonous obsequiousness of their lives.”</p>
<p>She was sorry for them, but she could not permit them to remedy their existence at her expense.</p>
<p>In her last letter she had explained to Jinny about those two troublesome staircases which lead from the train level of the New York Pennsylvania Railroad station to the street level. “There’s no use my trying to tell you which one to take in order to bring you up to the right hand or to the left hand side of the elevator because I never know myself. So all I can say, dear, is when you do get up to the elevator just stick to it and eventually I’ll see you or you’ll see me as I revolve around it. Don’t you move, for it might turn out that we were both going in the same direction.”</p>
<p>True to her own instructions, she was stationed between the two staircases, jerking her neck now toward one staircase, now toward the other, stopping short to look at the elevator itself. She thrust up her veil to see better.</p>
<p>A man sprinted by in desperate haste, brushing so closely by her that the corner of his suitcase struck sharply on the thin inner curve of her knee.</p>
<p>“My goodness!” she exclaimed involuntarily.</p>
<p>For all his haste he was a gentleman, for he pulled of his hat, threw her a quick backward glance and began: “I beg your—why darling, darling, you don’t mean to say you came to meet me!”</p>
<p>“Meet you! I thought you came in this morning.” It was Roger, Roger and the sight of him made her stupid with fear.</p>
<p>He stooped and kissed her, tenderly, possessively. “I did,—oh Angèle you are a beauty! Only a beauty can wear plain things like that. I did come in this morning but I’m trying to catch Kirby, my father’s lawyer, he ought to be coming in from Newark just now and I thought I’d take him down to Long Island with me for the night. I’ve got a lot of documents for him here in this suitcase—that Georgia business was most complicated—that way I won’t have to hunt him up in the morning and I’ll have more time to—to arrange for our trip in the afternoon. What are you doing here?”</p>
<p>What was she doing there? Waiting for her sister Jinny who was coloured and who showed it. And Roger hated Negroes. She was lost, ruined, unless she could get rid of him. She told the first lie that came into her mind.</p>
<p>“I’m waiting for Paulette.” All this could be fixed up with Paulette later. Miss Lister would think as little of deceiving a man, any man, as she would of squashing a mosquito. They were fair game and she would ask no questions.</p>
<p>His face clouded. “Can’t say I’m so wild about your waiting for Paulette. Well we can wait together—is she coming up from Philadelphia? That train’s bringing my man too from Newark.” He had the male’s terrible clarity of understanding for train connections.</p>
<p>“What time does your train go to Long Island? I thought you wanted to get the next one.”</p>
<p>“Well, I’d like to but they’re only half an hour apart. I can wait. Better the loss of an hour to-day than all of tomorrow morning. We can wait together; see the people are beginning to come up. I wish I could take you home but the minute he shows up I’ll have to sprint with him.”</p>
<p>“Now God be on my side,” she prayed. Sometimes these trains were very long. If Mr. Kirby were in the first car and Jinny toward the end that would make all of ten minutes’ difference. If only she hadn’t given those explicit directions!</p>
<p>There was Jinny, her head suddenly emerging into view above the stairs. She saw Angela, waved her hand. In another moment she would be flinging her arms about her sister’s neck; she would be kissing her and saying, “Oh, Angela, Angela darling!”</p>
<p>And Roger, who was no fool, would notice the name Angela—Angèle; he would know no coloured girl would make a mistake like this.</p>
<p>She closed her eyes in a momentary faintness, opened them again.</p>
<p>“What’s the matter?” said Roger sharply, “are you sick?”</p>
<p>Jinny was beside her. Now, now the bolt would fall. She heard the gay, childish voice saying laughingly, assuredly:</p>
<p>“I beg your pardon, but isn’t this Mrs. Henrietta Jones?”</p>
<p>Oh, God was good! Here was one chance if only Jinny would understand! In his astonishment Roger had turned from her to face the speaker. Angela, her eyes beseeching her sister’s from under her close hat brim, could only stammer the old formula: “Really you have the advantage of me. No, I’m not Mrs. Jones.”</p>
<p>Roger said rudely, “Of course she isn’t Mrs. Jones. Come, Angèle.” Putting his arm through hers he stooped for the suitcase.</p>
<p>But Jinny, after a second’s bewildered but incredulous stare, was quicker even than they. Her slight figure, her head high, preceded them; vanished into a telephone booth.</p>
<p>Roger glared after her. “Well of all the damned cheek!”</p>
<p>For the first time in the pursuit of her chosen ends she began to waver. Surely no ambition, no pinnacle of safety was supposed to call for the sacrifice of a sister. She might be selfish,—oh, undoubtedly she had been selfish all these months to leave Jinny completely to herself—but she had never meant to be cruel. She tried to picture the tumult of emotions in her sister’s mind, there must have been amazement,—oh she had seen it all on her face, the utter bewilderment, the incredulity and then the settling down on that face of a veil of dignity and pride—like a baby trying to harden mobile features. She was in her apartment again now, pacing the floor, wondering what to do. Already she had called up the house in 139th Street, it had taken her a half-hour to get the number for she did not know the householder’s name and “Information” had been coy,—but Miss Murray had not arrived yet. Were they expecting her? Yes, Miss Murray had written to say that she would be there between six and seven; it was seven-thirty now and she had not appeared. Was there any message? “No, no!” Angela explained she would call again.</p>
<p>But where was Jinny? She couldn’t be lost, after all she was grown-up and no fool, she could ask directons. Perhaps she had taken a cab and in the evening traffic had been delayed,—or had met with an accident. This thought sent Angela to the telephone again. There was no Miss Murray as yet. In her wanderings back and forth across the room she caught sight of herself in the mirror. Her face was flushed, her eyes shining with remorse and anxiety. Her vanity reminded her: “If Roger could just see me now”. Roger and tomorrow! He would have to speak words of gold to atone for this breach which for his sake she had made in her sister’s trust and affection.</p>
<p>At the end of an hour she called again. Yes, Miss Murray had come in. So great was her relief that her knees sagged under her. Yes of course they would ask her to come to the telephone. After a long silence the voice rang again over the wire. “I didn’t see her go out but she must have for she’s not in her room.”</p>
<p>“Oh all right,” said Angela, “the main thing was to know that she was there.” But she was astonished. Jinny’s first night in New York and she was out already! She could not go to see her Thursday because of the engagement with Roger, but she’d make good the next day; she’d be there the first thing, Friday morning. Snatching up a sheet of note-paper she began a long letter full of apologies and excuses. “And I can’t come tomorrow, darling, because as I told you I have a very important engagement, an engagement that means very much to me. Oh you’ll understand when I tell you about it.” She put a special delivery stamp on the letter.</p>
<p>Her relief at learning that Jinny was safe did not ease her guilty conscience. In a calmer mood she tried now to find excuses for herself, extenuating circumstances. As soon as Jinny understood all that was involved she would overlook it. After all, Jinny would want her to be happy. “And anyway,” she thought to herself sulkily, “Mamma didn’t speak to Papa that day that we were standing on the steps of the Hotel Walton.” But she knew that the cases were not analogous; no principle was involved, her mother’s silence had not exposed her husband to insult or contumely, whereas Roger’s attitude to Virginia had been distinctly offensive. “And moreover,” her thoughts continued with merciless clarity, “when a principle was at stake your mother never hesitated a moment to let those hospital attendants know of the true status of affairs. In fact she was not aware that she was taking any particular stand. Her husband was her husband and she was glad to acknowledge that relationship.”</p>
<p>A sick distaste for her action, for her daily deception, for Roger and his prejudices arose within her. But with it came a dark anger against a country and a society which could create such an issue. And she thought: “If I had spoken to Jinny, had acknowledged her, what good would it have done me or her either? After it was all over she would have been exactly where she was before and I would have lost everything. And I do so want to be happy, to have a good time. At this very hour tomorrow I’ll probably be one of the most envied girls in New York. And afterwards I can atone for it all. I’ll be good to all sorts of people; I’ll really help humanity, lots of coloured folks will be much better of on account of me. And if I had spoken to Jinny I could never have helped them at all.” Once she murmured: “I’ll help Jinny too, the darling! She shall have everything in the world she wants.” But in her heart she knew already that Jinny would want nothing.</p>
<h2>Chapter VII</h2>
<p>THURSDAY came and Thursday sped as Thursdays will. For a long time Angela saw it as a little separate entity of time shut away in some hidden compartment of her mind, a compartment whose door she dreaded to open.</p>
<p>On Friday she called up her sister early in the morning. “Is that you, Jinny? Did you get my letter? Is it all right for me to come up?”</p>
<p>“Yes,” said Jinny noncomittally, to all questions, then laconically: “But you’d better come right away if you want to catch me. I take the examination to-day and haven’t much time.”</p>
<p>Something in the matter-of-factness of her reply disconcerted Angela. Yet there certainly was no reason why her sister should show any enthusiasm over seeing her. Only she did want to see her, to talk to some one of her very own to-day. She would like to burrow her head in Virginia’s shoulder and cry! But a mood such as Jinny’s voice indicated did not invite confidences.</p>
<p>A stout brown-skinned bustling woman suggesting immense assurance and ability opened the door. “Miss Murray told me that she was expecting someone. You’re to go right on up. Her’s is the room right next to the third storey front.”</p>
<p>“She was expecting someone.” Evidently Virginia had been discreet. This unexpected, unsought for carefulness carried a sting with it.</p>
<p>“Hello,” said Jinny, casually thrusting a dishevelled but picturesque head out of the door. “Can you find your way in? This room’s larger than any two we ever had at home, yet already it looks like a ship at sea.” She glanced about the disordered place. “I wonder if this is what they mean by ‘shipshape’. Here I’ll hang up this suit, then you can sit down. Isn’t it a sweetie? Got it at Snellenburg’s.”</p>
<p>She had neither kissed nor offered to shake hands with her sister, yet her manner was friendly enough, even cordial. “See I’ve bobbed my hair,” she went on. “Like it? I’m wild about it even if it does take me forever to fix it.” Standing before a mirror she began shaping the ends under with a curling iron.</p>
<p>Angela thought she had never seen any one so pretty and so colourful. Jinny had always shown a preference for high colours; to-day she was revelling in them; her slippers were high heeled small red mules; a deep green dressing-gown hung gracefully from her slim shoulders and from its open collar flamed the rose and gold of her smooth skin. Her eyes were bright and dancing. Her hair, black, alive and curling, ended in a thick velvety straightness like cut plush.</p>
<p>Angela said stiffly, “I hope I didn’t get you up, telephoning so early.”</p>
<p>Virginia smiled, flushing a little more deeply under the dark gold of her skin. “Oh dear no! I’d already had an earlier call than that this morning.”</p>
<p>“You had!” exclaimed Angela, astonished. “I didn’t know you knew anyone in New York.” She remembered her sister’s mysterious disappearance the first night of her arrival. “And see here, Jinny, I’m awfully sorry about what happened the other night. I wouldn’t have had it happen for a great deal. I wish I could explain to you about it.” How confidently she had counted on having marvellous news to tell Virginia and now how could she drag to the light yesterday’s sorry memory? “But I called you up again and again and you hadn’t arrived and then when they finally did tell me that you had come, it appeared that you had gone out. Where on earth did you go?”</p>
<p>Jenny began to laugh, to giggle in fact. For a moment she was the Virginia of her school days, rejoicing in some innocent mischief, full of it. “I wasn’t out. There’s a wash-room down the hall and I went there to wash my face,——” it clouded a moment. “And when I came back I walked as I thought into my room. Instead of that I had walked into the room of another lodger. And there he sat——”</p>
<p>“Oh,” said Angela inattentively. “I’m glad you weren’t out. I was quite worried. Listen, Virginia,” she began desperately, “I know you think that what I did in the station the other day was unspeakable; it seems almost impossible for me to explain it to you. But that man with me was a very special friend,——”</p>
<p>“He must have been indeed,” Jinny interrupted drily, “to make you cut your own sister.” She was still apparently fooling with her hair, her head perched on one side, her eyes glued to the mirror. But she was not making much progress and her lips were trembling.</p>
<p>Angela proceeded unheeding, afraid to stop. “A special friend, and we had come to a very crucial point in our relationship. It was with him that I had the engagement yesterday.”</p>
<p>“Well, what about it? Were you expecting him to ask you to marry him? Did he?”</p>
<p>“No,” said Angela very low, “that’s just what he didn’t do though he,—he asked everything else.”</p>
<p>Virginia, dropping the hair-brush, swung about sharply. “And you let him talk like that?”</p>
<p>“I couldn’t help it once he had begun,—I was so taken by surprise, and, besides, I think that his ultimate intentions are all right.”</p>
<p>“His ultimate intentions! Why, Angela what are you talking about? You know perfectly well what his ultimate intentions are. Isn’t he a white man? Well, what kind of intentions would he have toward a coloured woman?”</p>
<p>“Simple! He doesn’t know I’m coloured. And besides some of them are decent. You must remember that I know something about these people and you don’t, you couldn’t, living that humdrum little life of yours at home.”</p>
<p>“I know enough about them and about men in general to recognize an insult when I hear one. Some men bear their character stamped right on their faces. Now this man into whose room I walked last night by mistake,——”</p>
<p>“I don’t see how you can do very much ta</p>
<p>lking walking into strange men’s rooms at ten o’clock at night.”</p>
<p>The triviality of the retort left Jinny dumb.</p>
<p>It was their first quarrel.</p>
<p>They sat in silence for a few minutes; for several minutes. Virginia, apparently completely composed, was letting the tendrils of her mind reach far, far out to the ultimate possibilities of this impasse in relationship between herself and her sister. She thought: “I really have lost her, she’s really gone out of my ken just as I used to lose her years ago when father and I would be singing ‘The Dying Christian’. I’m twenty-three years old and I’m really all alone in the world.” Up to this time she had always felt she had Angela’s greater age and supposedly greater wisdom to fall back on, but she banished this conjecture forever. “Because if she could cut me when she hadn’t seen me for a year for the sake of a man who she must have known meant to insult her, she certainly has no intention of openly acknowledging me again. And I don’t believe I want to be a sister in secret. I hate this hole and corner business.”</p>
<p>She saw again the scene in the station, herself at first so serene, so self-assured, Angela’s confused coldness, Roger’s insolence. Something hardened, grew cold within her. Even his arrogance had failed to bring Angela to her senses, and suddenly she remembered that it had been possible in slavery times for white men and women to mistreat their mulatto relations, their own flesh and blood, selling them into deeper slavery in the far South or standing by watching them beaten, almost, if not completely, to death. Perhaps there was something fundamentally different between white and coloured blood after all. Aloud she said: “You know before you went away that Sunday morning you said that you and I were different. Perhaps you’re right, Angela; perhaps there is an extra infusion of white blood in your veins which lets you see life at another angle. If that’s the case I have no right to judge you. You must forgive my ignorant comments.”</p>
<p>She began slipping into a ratine dress of old blue trimmed with narrow collars and cuffs and a tiny belt of old rose. Above the soft shades the bronze and black of her head etched themselves sharply; she might have been a dainty bird of Paradise cast in a new arrangement of colours but her tender face was set in strange and implacable lines.</p>
<p>Angela looked at her miserably. She had not known just what, in her wounded pride and humiliation, she had expected to gain from her sister, but certainly she had hoped for some balm. And in any event not this cool aloofness. She had forgotten that her sister might be suffering from a wound as poignant as her own. The year had made a greater breach than she had anticipated; she had never been as outspoken, as frank with Virginia as the latter had been with her, but there had always been a common ground between them, a meeting place. In the household Jinny had had something of a reputation for her willingness to hear all sides of a story, to find an excuse or make one.</p>
<p>An old aphorism of Hetty Daniels returned to her. “He who would have friends must show himself friendly.” And she had done anything but that; she had neglected Jinny, had failed to answer her letters, had even planned,—was it only day before yesterday!—to see very little of her in what she had dreamed would be her new surroundings. Oh she had been shameful! But she would make it up to Jinny now—and then she could come to her at this, this crisis in her life which so frightened and attracted her. She was the more frightened because she felt that attraction. She would make her sister understand the desires and longings which had come to her in this strange, dear, free world, and then together they would map out a plan of action. Jinny might be a baby but she had strength. So much strength, said something within her, that just as likely as not she would say: “Let the whole thing go, Angela, Angela! You don’t want to be even on the outskirts of a thing like this.”</p>
<p>Before she could begin her overtures Jinny was speaking. “Listen, Angela, I’ve got to be going. I don’t know when we’ll be seeing each other again, and after what happened Wednesday you can hardly expect me to be looking you up, and as you doubtless are very busy you’d hardly be coming ’way up here. But there are one or two things I want to talk to you about. First about the house.”</p>
<p>“About the house? Why it’s yours. I’ve nothing more to do with it.”</p>
<p>“I know, but I’m thinking of selling it. There is such a shortage of houses in Philadelphia just now; Mr. Hallowell says I can get at least twice as much as father paid for it. And in that case you’ve some more money coming to you.”</p>
<p>If only she had known of this,—when?—twenty-four hours earlier, how differently she might have received Roger’s proposition. If she had met Virginia Wednesday and had had the talk for which she had planned!</p>
<p>“Well of course it would be awfully nice to have some more money. But what I don’t understand is how are you going to live? What are you going to do?”</p>
<p>“If I pass this examination I’m coming over here, my appointment would be only a matter of a few months. I’m sure of that. This is May and I’d only have to wait until September. Well, I wouldn’t be working this summer anyway. And there’s no way in the world which I could fail to pass. In fact I’m really thinking of taking a chance and coming over here to substitute. Mr. Holloster, the University of Pennsylvania man, has been investigating and he says there’s plenty of work. And I guess I’m due to have a change; New York rather appeals to me. And there certainly is something about Harlem!” In spite of her careless manner Angela knew she was thinking about Matthew Henson. She stretched out her hand, pulled Jinny’s head down on her shoulder. “Oh darling, don’t worry about him. Matthew really wasn’t the man for you.”</p>
<p>“Well,” said Virginia, “as long as I think he was, the fact that he wasn’t doesn’t make any real difference, does it? At least not at first. But I certainly shan’t worry about it.”</p>
<p>“No don’t,—I,——” It was on the tip of her tongue to say “I know two or three nice young men whom you can play around with. I’ll introduce you to them.” But could she? Jinny understood her silence; smiled and nodded. “It’s all right, honey, you can’t do anything; you would if you could. We’ve just got to face the fact that you and I are two separate people and we’ve got to live our lives apart, not like the Siamese twins. And each of us will have to go her chosen way. After all each of us is seeking to get all she can out of life! and if you can get more out of it by being white, as you undoubtedly can, why, why shouldn’t you? Only it seems to me that there are certain things in living that are more fundamental even than colour,—but I don’t know. I’m all mixed up. But evidently you don’t feel that way, and you’re just as likely to be right as me.”</p>
<p>“Jinny!”</p>
<p>“My dear, I’m not trying to reproach you. I’m trying to look at things without sentiment. After all, in a negative way, merely by saying nothing, you’re disclaiming your black blood in a country where it is an inconvenience,—oh! there’s not a doubt about that. You may be proud of it, you may be perfectly satisfied with it—I am—but it certainly can shut you out of things. So why shouldn’t you disclaim a living manifestation of that blood?”</p>
<p>Before this cool logic Angela was silent. Virginia looked at her sister, a maternal look oddly apparent on her young face. When she was middle-aged she would be the embodiment of motherhood. How her children would love her!</p>
<p>“Angela, you’ll be careful!”</p>
<p>“Yes; darling. Oh if only I could make you understand what it’s all about.”</p>
<p>“Yes, well, perhaps another time. I’ve got to fly now.” She hesitated, took Angela by the arms and gazed into her eyes. “About this grand white party that you were in the station with. Are you awfully in love with him?”</p>
<p>“I’m not in love with him at all.”</p>
<p>“Oh, pshaw!” said innocent Virginia, “you’ve got nothing to worry about! Why, what’s all the shooting for?”</p>
